# STAT426_final
Final Project for STAT 426

Every year, the NBA selects 15 players to All-NBA 1st, 2nd, and 3rd teams. These provide not only accolades, but contract incentives that maximize a player's earnings. The focus of my project was whether I could use raw statistics to predict who will make one of the annual All-NBA teams? A secondary question was whether traditional statistics (points, rebounds, assists, etc.) or advanced statistics (PER, BPM, VORP) would be more reliable in prediction. I wanted to see if advanced analytics, which have only become ubiquitous in recent years, would have the same predicting value as the counting stats that have been used throughout the history of the NBA.

I gathered the data from basketball-reference.com from three different page formats. I gathered the players who've made All-NBA teams each season (saved as all_nba_teams.png in git repository), then wrote a for loop to gather all of the traditional and advanced stats (saved as all_player_stats.png and all_advanced_stats.png) from 1980 (the first year the three point line was introduced) to 2020, combining them into one table. After reading and wrangling my data, I selected specific features for traditional and advanced stats. For traditional, I used Field Goal Attempts, Effective Field Goal Percentage, Points, Total Rebounds, Assists, Blocks, and Steals. For Advanced metrics, I used Player Efficiency Rating, Usage Percentage, True Shooting Percentage, Box Plus Minus, Win Shares per 48, and Value over Replacement Player. I initially combined the data together into one table called total and used Multinomial NB, Decision Tree, and Random Forest models. 

The models I tested were Multinomial Naive Bayes, Decision Tree, and Random Forest. Multinomial NB predicted that no player would make an All-NBA team, so clearly that model was an issue. The best model was the random forest. The random forest model had about a 97% accuracy, while only about 93% of the data was players who didn't make an All-NBA team. It was able to find the pattern and predict 99% of those who didn't make the All-NBA team correctly. It also guessed 70% of those who made an All-NBA team correctly, a high number considering only 6% of players make one of the teams. My model strength is the amount of variables that went into the model, while one of its weaknesses is that there are still many more variables that could be used to get that number even closer to 100%. I tried numerous combinations for my input features, settling on the ones I chose since they had a very all around inclusiveness that covered every aspect of the game. 

I then separated the advanced and tradiitonal statistics back into their datasets and ran them through random forest models. To my surprise, the advanced statisitics were on average about a 1% higher than the traditional stats, despite the lack of usage until only recently. It showed that even back in the 80's, when advanced stats weren't utilized, these stats could reliably predict who would make an All-NBA team at about the same rate as traditional stats. There could be some bias, however, in the variables I chose. I have a lot of experience with the NBA and so I chose the variables I felt would best predict from each category. 

This report proved to be successful in predction. This opens up the door to predicting other awards, such as MVP, All-Stars, All-Defensive teams, and more. With the amount of basketball data available, we can find answers to just about every question we can find.
